# AndroidAPS - DEV VERSION (AAPS 3)

**UAM Tsunami PLUGIN by Michael Pinner**

This README is valid for AAPS 3 (DEV VERSION) running the UAM Tsunami plugin v. 2.1.2

_Tsunami v2.0 is a modified variant of AndroidAPS with added capabilities to automatically handle unannounced meals (UAM). This algorithm is highly experimental – do not use it on yourself! Do not use it on children!_

## Introduction
Tsunami v2.0 is the third iteration of this project, and it comes with some of the largest changes so far. Please read this README carefully so you understand how this algorithm works – for your own safety.

### History of the project

#### Tsunami v0.#
The first versions (v0.#) used the Michaelis-Menten equation to scale down user-set ISF values during meals in dependence of delta values. This approach was necessary to use the oref1 algorithm also for UAM. Originally, oref1 was designed to work with announced carbohydrates and thus the standard version of AAPS is too weak when it is confronted with unannounced carbs, resulting in unacceptably high glucose values.

Tsunami v0 separated meals into individual waves: A first spike at the beginning of a meal, and weaker second wave a bit after a meal. Because of this the settings for wave 1 were generally more aggressive, but for reasons of safety had to be turned on manually by setting an eating-soon temp target (TT). In contrast, wave 2 mode did not require manual user input as it was active when no TT was set. While this approach worked reasonably well, the Michaelis-Menten approach requires the user to set a number of scaling and safety parameters to tune aggressiveness. This was confusing to some and regularly resulted in people copying other people’s settings without truly understanding what each parameter actually does. A second problem was that users had to choose the optimal TT duration for each meal, as too long or too short durations could end with in undesired results. Because of this the earliest versions were only a minor improvement over classic carb announcement. Development efforts began to focus on TT free forms of UAM. In fact, even though second phase meal handling was weaker, it turned out to still handle UAM reasonably well. This option, perpetual wave 2 mode, was explored further by the AIMI-Tsunami spin-off project.

#### Tsunami v1.0 / 1.0.1
The mainline Tsunami project followed a different approach than AIMI-Tsunami, however. New mechanisms for glucose curve analysis were introduced. Instead of differentiating between individual meal waves, each wave itself was now split up into three distinct phases: acceleration phase, linear phase, deceleration phase. It no longer mattered if a rise occurred at the beginning of a meal or later. All that mattered was the current state of the glucose curve. Second-order polynomial functions were fit to the glucose data to determine which phase the curve was in, and based on this the algorithm tuned the aggressiveness of ISF scaling. This approach worked well and allowed safe meal handling without the need of manual user input, but some of the problems already known from v0.# were inherited by tsunami v1.0. Ultimately, these issues triggered the development of Tsunami v2.0. The README file of Tsunami v1.0 already mentioned that ISF scaling was going to be replaced in the future, and Tsunami v2.0 is the first version running on a scaling-free UAM engine.

### The problems of older Tsunami versions & ISF scaling in general

#### 1 - Scaling parameters & the scaling approach
The tunability of Michaelis-Menten based ISF scaling turned out to be an advantage and disadvantage at the same time. While aggressiveness could be fine-tuned using a set of three scaling parameters, these settings had to be guessed. Some people resorted to adopting the settings of other users without understanding the meaning of the individual parameters. As a consequence, it was not always clear to every user which setting they needed to adjust for improved result. This situation can be potentially dangerous and calls for a simpler, more user friendly UAM code.

#### 2 - The illusion of glucose targets
To be very blunt: User specified glucose targets and TTs never really mattered. Oref1 will correct for high glucose values by dividing the difference of current bg and target bg by the ISF value it receives. Meals, however, require larger insulin quantities than pure bg corrections can provide in a timely manner. ISF scaling is needed to trick oref1 into believing that the already delivered insulin quantity is not enough to bring the current bg down to target. A consequence of this is that insulin requirements calculated using oref1's correction equation are little more than guesses or random values. There is no underlying theoretical base behind the SMB sizes calculated. In practice, this means that the code was trying to bring high BGs back to target as it normally would, but the ISF value it received was wrong. The reason why this approach worked nevertheless is due mostly to an array of limits, modifiers and the inherent property of MM based scaling where the scaling varies along with delta. ISF scaling renders bg targets to mild but inconvenient means of further tuning aggressiveness of the code. Importantly though, one has to give up the idea that ISF scaling approaches will bring the glucose curve down to a specific target value. This will likely be true for UAM algorithms in general, but extent of it differs - as wil be explained in the next paragraph.

#### 3 - The problem of glucose prediction models & oref1
Oref1 relies heavily on its glucose prediction models to judge whether or not it is safe to deliver an SMB. A very large part of the source code deals with calculating these models and judging whether it is safe to deliver an SMB or whether it would be better to zero temp instead. In UAM mode, these predictions are inevitably very crude - if not plain wrong. This problem becomes even more complex through ISF scaling approaches, which fake lower than real ISF values and therefore also affect the prediction models. On the other hand, this is part of the reason why ISF scaling approaches make use of oref1 for UAM work in the first place: They change the prediction curves such that oref1 is willing to deliver SMBs in situations where it otherwise would predict low glucose events. ISF scaling was implemented to confer UAM capabilities to oref1, but oref1 was designed to work with carb announcements. This means that ISF scaling forces oref1 to do a job it wasn’t really designed for.

#### 4 - Same delta values do not always mean the same thing
The same reported delta values (e.g. +5) do not necessarily mean the same thing. This was ignored in previous Tsunami versions, but is at the core of Tsunami v2.0. A detailed explanation will follow later.

#### 5 - Same IOB values do not always have the same implications
IOB is all the majority of loopers talk about, but there’s a lot more to consider. IOB is suboptimal for UAM purposes, but it was the main (and only) insulin variable used in older Tsunami versions. It does make a difference whether IOB is 1 because you just injected 1 U, or if it is 1 because you have injected 3 U 1.5 h ago. Tsunami v2.0 takes this into account. The keyword is insulin activity - the heart of the Tsunami Activity Engine as introduced with version 2.0.

## Tsunami v2.0
The latest version of UAM Tsunami introduces an entirely new UAM engine. No base variables are scaled, only user-set profile ISF values are used. AAPS knows two major types of insulin variables: IOB and activity. Whereas IOB is the predicted amount of unused insulin in the body, insulin activity is the predicted quantity of insulin active in the blood stream right now. In mathematical terms: IOB is the integral of the insulin activity curve from now until DIA (duration of insulin activity) minutes. Directly after bolusing 1 U, IOB will be 1 U and insulin activity will be 0 U. As time progresses, IOB will continuously go down, whereas insulin activity will go up until it peaks and then drops again. You have defined the insulin model AAPS uses by defining DIA in your profile and choosing an insulin preset (i.e. insulin peak time) inside the config builder. The insulin plugin of AAPS nicely plots the IOB and activity curves - go and have a look at yours if you're unfamiliar with them. Note how the pink IOB curve goes from 1 to 0, whereas the blue activity curve goes up, peaks, and then goes back down again.

For UAM purposes where the quantity of carbohydrates consumed is unknown, it is important to halt a glucose climb as soon as possible without overshooting and thereby causing hypoglycemia. As I hopefully made clear above, it is not (just) IOB that matters, but insulin activity. IOB carries no information about the rate of insulin absorption. At a DIA of 6 h and an insulin peak time of 40 min, it takes about 90 minutes for a bolus of 3 U to decay down to 1 U. Over the next hour, this remaining IOB of 1 U will lower your bg much faster than a 1 U bolus in the same time directly after bolusing. This is important to consider particularly if glucose levels are rising, e.g. due to second or third meal waves. A delta of +10 mg/dl/5 min at 0 insulin activity describes a much slower rise than a delta of +10 mg/dl/5 min at an activity of 0.1 U/5min. As an example, if your ISF is 50 mg/dl/U, the corrected delta values would be:

+10 at 0 activity = +10 (unchanged delta);

+10 at 0.1 activity = +15 (+50% over reported sensor delta);

The active insulin compensates some of the raise, resulting in a lower measured delta. This, by the way, may also be the mechanism behind perceived “insulin resistance” at persistent highs. You are not likely not resistant to insulin; you are just compensating hidden glucose rises! The reason why this matters is that a relatively small delta of +5 will require different amounts of insulin depending on the currently active insulin. If you get +5 at a large quantity of active insulin, you will very likely shoot up like a rocket soon as the activity levels begin to drop. Tsunami v2.0 takes this into account and acts accordingly.

Tsunami v2.0 aims to replace the ISF scaling based UAM engine by an insulin activity based one (Tsunami Activity Engine - TAE). To make this work, oref1’s glucose prediction models are **no longer used** while TAE is active. Whether or not TAE is active depends on the development of your glucose and an array of safety constraints. If there are safety issues or if your glucose is not rising (negative delta), TAE will deactivate itself so oref1 can take over. If you are eating and it is deemed safe, TAE will kick in and take over from oref1. Importantly though: TAE and oref1 are calculating insulin requirements only when it is their turn! Oref1 will use its prediction models, TAE will not. In general, TAE is active while you eat and your glucose is stable (most of the time), oref1 is active when your glucose is dropping or TAE is inactive (e.g. at night).

As was outlined above, in the context of UAM looping oref1's glucose prediction models are unreliable and often times wrong. Furthermore, the SMB sizing equation used by oref1 is not suitable for UAM purposes as there is no way to predict the required amount of insulin to bring bg back to target if the amount of carbs consumed is unknown. Finally, as mentioned before, target glucose values have no meaning in ISF scaling approaches in particular, and UAM mode in general. **Tsunami v2.0’s activity engine does not have the goal to bring bg back to target. Instead, it aims to bring glucose climbs to a halt in a timely manner (i.e. turn a positive delta into a zero delta)**. The algorithm will calculate the amount of insulin required to bring the current, activity corrected delta value to 0 in “peak time” minutes, assuming that delta will remain constant. In reality, delta values change, and as insulin activity does not stop after peaking, you will notice that your glucose will not just plateau, but also drop soon thereafter. The exact development of your glucose curve obviously depends on the type of meal, but in general you will still eventually end up close to the specified target value.

### Tsunami activity engine modes
TAE has two modes: Near-constant activity mode & activity build-up mode. Activity-build up mode is the main mode active during a meal when your glucose values are rising fast. TAE will attempt to build up insulin activity quickly to halt the climb. When this is the case and delta values are between +0-4 mg/dl/5min, the risk of overdosing is becoming larger – particularly hours after a meal. This is when near-constant activity mode kicks in. The aim of it is to keep activity levels at 75% of the current activity, resulting in a slower than normal decay of IOB. Ideally, this will weaken or prevent postprandial glucose spikes (“second waves”) which otherwise would also increase the risk of overdosing. Ideally, near-constant activity mode will keep your glucose constant while your body is still digesting your last meal until insulin activity is larger than carb activity and your glucose begins to drop.

### How to use
Make sure your profile is correct. The better your profile, the better the results. Tsunami v2.0 will use your actual ISF values, always remember this! The algorithm relies on correct basal and ISF profiles. If you have knowingly faked your ISF values for previous UAM mods, please correct them.

Aside from basals and ISF, good DIA and insulin peak time settings are of great importance.

You can manually set your insulin peak-time using Free-Peak oref, or use one of the insulin presets (e.g. Ultra-Rapid oref or Lyumjev) with fixed peak-times. Tsunami 2 takes the peak-time set as the target time for its calculations. If you find that something about your insulin kinetics has changed, please be ready to adjust your DIA and peak-time settings just as naturally as you would adjust changes to your basal and ISF profiles. For optimal results, the activity model curve should be as accurate as possible. It is also recommended to switch on the activity graph in the BG graph on the main screen. Often times, the glucose curve – at least in parts – follows the activity curve. Monitoring your insulin activity curve will help you understand what TAE is doing and potentially spot if your peak-time or DIA settings are wrong.

TAE is a virtually settings-free UAM engine. This means that you do not have to tune its aggressiveness as you may be used to from older Tsunami versions. Instead, TAE is using your ISF values to calculate insulin requirements. For safety reasons, there are four safety paramets for you to set in the SMB preferences:

UAM bolus cap: Specifies the maximum size of each SMB. For safety reason, the algorithm will allow max-sized SMBs only once every 10 minutes. Don't be surprised if you see that no SMB is delivered 5 minutes after a max-size SMB! SMBs that are between 70-100% of the bolus cap will reduce the maximum possible size of the next SMB to the amount missing to get a max-size SMB (E.g: Bolus cap = 1U; Last SMB was 0.7 U (so 70%) - the next SMB may only be 0.3 U or smaller). SMBs smaller than 70% of bolus cap will not affect the next SMB.

Insulin delivery percentage: This setting reduces the calculated insulin required to the specified percentage. Example: TAE calculates that 1 U is required. If your setting is 70%, insulin required will be adjusted to 1 * 0.7 = 0.7 U.

TAE start/end time: Hours of the day between (and inlcuding) which TAE is active. For safety reasons it makes sense to not use TAE at night while you're sleeping. If you wish some UAM functionality also at night, you can switch on autoISF. autoISF is an ISF scaling approach, but it is a lot weaker than previous Tsunami versions.

### A note about prebolusing
Preboluses have the aim to build up insulin activity before the sensor could register a rise. As this issue is one an algorithm cannot solve (Tsunami can't decrease sensor lag times or increase insulin absorption rates ;) ), prebolusing is recommended for every meal. Leaving out the prebolus will result in higher than necessary glucose spikes. Every user must decide for themselves if such spikes are acceptable or not. Attempts to make up for missed preboluses by injecting very large SMBs come at an increased risk of overdosing and could in some situations cause severe episodes of hypoglycemia. For safety reasons, no code aiming to replace prebolusing is included in Tsunami v2.0. For the same reason, the size of the bolus cap setting should be chosen with care.

### Limitations
Small snacks with a high glycemic index (sweets, glucose tabs etc.) will result in sudden and very steep rises that usually end as quickly as they began. Several safety mechanisms are in place to reduce the risk of overdosing, particularly if bg is in the low 100 mg/dl range. However, small amounts of high-GI foods could still trigger an overreaction and it's therefore good practice to keep an eye on your bg. The safety mechanisms in place today are better than they were in earlier Tsunami versions, but there is still a lot of work ahead. Risks can be reduced by prebolusing. Alternatively, you can manually switch of TAE, either by switching it off in the settings, by setting a high TT with the SMB with high temp pargets setting enabled, by logging the carbs consumed (COB disables TAE) or simply by suspending loop for an hour.

In general, UAM plugins cannot avoid hypos and hypers altogether. Sometimes your curve will be perfect, other times you will find yourself shooting up to values of 200 mg/dl or more. There are many possible reasons for this, including issues with your pump sites (tunnelling?), sensor issues (delayed responses & noisy data), insulin issues (the faster the insulin, the better the results), changes in your sensitivity (sickness / sports) and so on. Many things can go wrong in diabetes. In case of problems, make sure that you are not experiencing any of the issues listed above. If you are sure that none of these issues apply to you, you may have found a bug or shortcoming of the code. In this case, please report the bug to me.

### Bug reports
If you think you have found a bug, please let me know by describing the situation. The script debug section in the SMB tab contains a tsunami status part – please take a screenshot of it. At the bottom of the script debug section, you may also find a checkpoint code (e.g. "Checkpoint 3A") – please also take a screenshot of that. Bugs are errors in the code and are generally reproducible. If you find yourself commonly going low or high, this may hint that the algorithm is too weak/too strong in what it is doing. Version 2.0 is relatively strict as far as safety goes. One goal of this test is to find out if stricter safety features need to be added, or if the current safety features are too strict. Your experience is valueable, please share it. In general though, because of the complexity of diabetes, more than one meal is needed to be able to tell if the code is flawed or not. Being a tester comes with the advantage of being among the first people to test new featuers, but with the disadvantage of being among the first people to run into problems. :) I'm working hard to improve this code further, and I really appreciate your help!

### Tsunami activity engine in bullet points:
- TAE has two modes: Constant-activity mode & activity build-up mode.
- TAE will only handle glucose rises and let oref1 take over if delta is negative.
- TAE calculates insulin requirements itself. A lose description could be: TAE handles meals, oref1 handles hypos and glucose drops.
- Oref1 will take care of temp basal management (zero temping).
- Oref1 will adjust insulin requirements as calculated by TAE such that it respects max IOB, your bolus cap and your pump’s minimal bolus size.
- TAE does not use oref1’s glucose predictions.
- The role of glucose targets is mainly that of safety thresholds. TAE is inactive if your bg is below your target. Target values are also used for mealscore calculations in constant activity mode.
- TAE assumes that the insulin activity from 10 minutes ago is the activity that matches the current delta, taking sensor lag into account.
- TAE is virtually settings-free. This is not because the settings are all hardcoded, but because insulin requirements are calculated according to pharmacokinetic considerations. The 4 remaining settings are there to give you as the user control over your own safety:
   - Boluscap – the maximum SMB size that may be given at a time
   - Insulin delivery percentage – percentage of calculated insulin requirement to deliver as an SMB. Other constraints still apply (maxIOB, boluscap).
   - TAE start/end times: Time window within which TAE is active.
- If switched on in the settings, autoISF can be used - but only outside TAE hours, e.g. for assistance with large meals at night.

## Change log
- Removed Tsunami classic mode (v0.#)
- Removed w-zero mode (v1.0 / v1.0.1)
- Removed additional meal TT buttons
- Removed automatic prebolus when eating-soon TT is set (full restoration of AAPS master behaviour)
- Removed w-zero target adjustment (full restoration of AAPS master autosens target adjustment)
- Added Tsunami Activity Engine (TAE)
- Code clean up
